Title: Wheels for free-threaded Python now available in psutil
Date: 2025-10-25
Tags: psutil, python, wheels
Authors: Giampaolo Rodola

With the release of **psutil 7.1.2**, wheels for free-threaded Python are now
available. This milestone was achieved largely through a **community effort**,
as several internal refactorings to the C code were required to make it
possible (see [issue #2565](https://github.com/giampaolo/psutil/issues/2565#issuecomment-2910225647)).
Many of these changes were contributed by [Lysandros
Nikolaou](https://github.com/lysnikolaou).
Thanks to him for the effort and for bearing with me in code reviews! ;-)

## What is free-threaded Python?

Free-threaded Python (available since **Python 3.13**) refers to Python builds
that are compiled with the **GIL (Global Interpreter Lock) disabled**, allowing
true parallel execution of Python bytecodes across multiple threads. This is
particularly beneficial for **CPU-bound applications**, as it enables better
utilization of multi-core processors.

## The state of free-threaded wheels

According to Hugo van Kemenade's [free-threaded wheels
tracker](https://hugovk.github.io/free-threaded-wheels/), the adoption of
free-threaded wheels among the **top 360 most-downloaded PyPI packages with C
extensions** is still limited. Only **128 out of these 360 packages** provide
wheels compiled for free-threaded Python, meaning they can run on Python builds
with the GIL disabled. This shows that, while progress has been made, most
popular packages with C extensions still do not offer ready-made wheels for
free-threaded Python.

## What it means for users

When a library author provides a wheel, users can install a **pre-compiled
binary package** without having to build it from source. This is especially
important for packages with **C extensions**, like psutil, which is largely
written in C. Such packages often have complex build requirements and require
installing a C compiler. On Windows, that means installing **Visual Studio** or
the Build Tools, which can take several gigabytes and a *significant* setup
effort. Providing wheels spare users from this hassle, makes installation far
simpler, and is effectively **essential for the users** of that package. You
basically `pip install psutil` and you're done.

## What it means for library authors

Currently, **universal wheels for free-threaded Python do not exist**. Each
wheel must be built specifically for a Python version. Right now authors must
create separate wheels for Python 3.13 and 3.14. Which means distributing *a
lot* of files already:

```
psutil-7.1.2-cp313-cp313t-macosx_10_13_x86_64.whl
psutil-7.1.2-cp313-cp313t-macosx_11_0_arm64.whl
psutil-7.1.2-cp313-cp313t-manylinux2010_x86_64.manylinux_2_12_x86_64.manylinux_2_28_x86_64.whl
psutil-7.1.2-cp313-cp313t-manylinux2014_aarch64.manylinux_2_17_aarch64.manylinux_2_28_aarch64.whl
psutil-7.1.2-cp313-cp313t-win_amd64.whl
psutil-7.1.2-cp313-cp313t-win_arm64.whl
psutil-7.1.2-cp314-cp314t-macosx_10_15_x86_64.whl
psutil-7.1.2-cp314-cp314t-macosx_11_0_arm64.whl
psutil-7.1.2-cp314-cp314t-manylinux2010_x86_64.manylinux_2_12_x86_64.manylinux_2_28_x86_64.whl
psutil-7.1.2-cp314-cp314t-manylinux2014_aarch64.manylinux_2_17_aarch64.manylinux_2_28_aarch64.whl
psutil-7.1.2-cp314-cp314t-win_amd64.whl
psutil-7.1.2-cp314-cp314t-win_arm64.whl
```

This also multiplies CI jobs and slows down the test matrix (see
[build.yml](https://github.com/giampaolo/psutil/blob/7dfd0ed34fe70ffd879ae62d21aabd4a8ed06d6f/.github/workflows/build.yml)).
A **true universal wheel** would greatly reduce this overhead, allowing a
single wheel to support multiple Python versions and platforms. Hopefully,
**Python 3.15** will simplify this process. Two competing proposals, [PEP
803](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0803/) and [PEP
809](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0809/), aim to standardize wheel
naming and metadata to allow producing **a single wheel that covers multiple
Python versions**. That would drastically reduce distribution complexity for
library authors, and it's fair to say it's essential for free-threaded CPython
to truly succeed.

## How to install free-threaded psutil

You can now install psutil for free-threaded Python directly via `pip`:

```bash
pip install psutil --only-binary=:all:
```

This ensures you get the **pre-compiled wheels** without triggering a source
build.
